When I started discussing the scores,
many people were surprised.
How could you possibly spend a whole
day discussing CSS variables?
Like really, a whole day?
How much is there to CSS variables?
So this actually stems from
a misconception about what
CSS variables really are.
A lot of people are used to
something like this in Sass,
they define like their global variables,
and then they use them.
And it's pretty processed and CSS is
spat out less looks kind of similar,
just slightly different syntax.
So then they refactor their
CSS to look like this.
And they're like, okay, I don't
understand what all the fuss is about,
this just does the same things
with weirder, lengthier syntax.
But that buries the lead because
CSS variables can do so much more.
So let's look at an example here and
this is the first slide
that has live coding areas.
So I'm gonna walk you around a little bit
because you're gonna be doing exercises on
these as well.
You can edit the code areas by typing
here, you can press the up and
down auto keys to increment and
decrement things.
And it works just like dev tools so
shift and alt and control work as well.
Every slide has notes on
the top right corner.
Unless I tell you to open these notes,
you probably won't need them during
the workshop, but they often have
supplemental resources that you could look
at by yourself after the workshop,
or if you're watching this at home.
You can press the Next button to go to the
next slide because sometimes the arrow key
won't work.
And those slides if you focus on
the iframe here, and if you're more
comfortable editing code in code pen
you can press the code pen button and
it opens the current state
of your code in code pen.
So you could even start writing
code in the code area here and
finish in code pen if you feel that
you'd be more comfortable doing that.
And you can click on the HTML
panel to pop up the HTML or
the CSS panel to pop up the CSS.
One thing to note, is that on these
slides it doesn't include the entire,
CSS code but only what's relevant
to this particular example.
Whereas if you open on code pen
obviously will need to have the entire
CSS code otherwise it wouldn't work.
So that is part of the reason why I prefer
these because I can show you only what's
relevant and not the entire like
background setting code and
like padding and margins and all of
those that are not actually relevant, So
back to the point I wanted to make here,
so take a look at this
code I'm setting the corner size
custom property on these two rules and
I'm actually using it
on on a separate rule.
This is something that you
already cannot do in Sass.
In fact, in the notes I have a link
to a code pen, that we could look at,
that shows you what kind of syntax
error happens if you try to
do something like this in Sass.
So I've actually re-factor this example
to use exactly the same code but
with Sass variables and
if I try to edit here you'll see that
code pen complains that there's an error.
What is the error undefined variable
because in Sass every variable
needs to be used within the same
curly brackets that it's defined or
nested curly brackets inside them.
It has what we call in programming
languages lexical scope it's the same
thing that that JavaScript has it's the
same way that JavaScript scopes variables.
In CSS we have dynamic scope
variables are defined on elements and
they're scoped to the element and
we can define them anywhere.
So notice here we can use whatever kind
of measurement we want first off and
we could even set this property
on an inline style and
it would work just fine.
Take a look at that,
that is something you can't do with Sass.
And as we'll see in the end of the
workshop, we can even use JavaScript to
set these variables and
that opens up so many possibilities.
So the first takeaway is that Sass
variables are scoped on curly bracket
blocks where a CSS variables
are scoped on actual elements.
So before I move on,
let's get something out of the way.
I know that some of you
are thinking wait a second.
I thought we weren't supposed
to call these CSS variables,
there are custom properties, right?
The short answer is it doesn't matter use
whatever term you want in fact the actual
specification you can find the link to
that in the notes uses both and here's
their custom properties but they can also
be used as reactive variables as well.
Certain use cases naturally make more
sense with one or the other term,
others work with both.
I'll be using both terms today
throughout the workshop and
some people have suggested using the term
custom property when setting them and
CSS variable when getting them, feel free
to adopt that if it resonates with you,
or don't, it doesn't actually matter.
And another thing to get out of the way,
because I get this question a lot,
what's up with root?
Why do people keep defining
variables in root.
So this is just a convention.
Root is a pseudo class that
resolves to the root element,
which is the HTML element in HTML,
the SVG element in SVG, and so
on because, yes,
custom properties work in SVG as well.
Any markup language on the web,
custom properties work there too,
anything that accepts CSS really.
But in HTML,
it's just equivalent to the HTML selector.
It just has higher specificity,
it has the specificity of a class,
instead of the specificity of an element.
But it's just a convention nothing changes
if you don't follow it so
you could follow it or not.
Some people like to do this,
they like to separate their global
variables into a root selector
just to signify to other developers
that hey these are my global variables.
And then they use the actual HTML selector
for any actual styles but you could
also just use the HTML selector you could
just use the route selector for both.
In the past, there was an actual
practical reason to use route there
were some preprocessor plugins
some posts CSS plugins that pre
processed custom properties to
rewrite them to actual CSS for
browsers that don't
support custom properties.
These days this is not really
relevant first of every
browser supports custom properties today.
And also there are better
pre processors today.
So even if you do need to rewrite them,
there are smarter pre
processors that take all rules
into account and not just route.
And another thing to get out of the way
is what CSS variables can't do because
the rest of the workshop
focuses on what they can do so
I feel it's only fair to tell you
what they can't do straight up, so
you don't struggle trying to get them to
do things that they weren't designed for.
So one thing that Sass can
do that CSS variables cant,
is using variables in property names.
CSS variables can only be
used in property values or
descriptor values,
in some cases not property names.
They can also not be used in selectors and
they cannot be used in not rules.
Basically, this entire table
is telling you one thing.
CSS variables can only be referenced
in property values and nothing else.
But nothing prevents you from using
SASS variables for those cases,
as we'll see in some parts of the workshop
you can actually mix and match.
You can use CSS variables together
with Sass variables to get the most of
both worlds.